in today's episode of health theory with
dave asprey we discuss how to enhance
your cognition and daily performance why
your ego is holding you back from the
life you want how to use the bulletproof
diet for longevity and how to overcome
hungry ghost syndrome with gratitude
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dave asprey the silicon
valley tech entrepreneur and new york
times best-selling author of several
books including headstrong and most
recently game changers what leaders
innovators and mavericks do to win at
life he's also one of the world's most
famous biohackers the founder and ceo of
bulletproof coffee and the host of the
webby award-winning podcast bulletproof
radio
now dave the fascinating thing about you
is how eclectic you are which i was
really impressed by the new book is cool
all over the map
but as somebody who's crazy good at
optimizing where i want to start his
nootropics so my personal obsession is
the brain and you go into in the book
nootropics you talk about
going to burning man as one of your
action items which i thought was cool
walk me through
nootropics how we can use things to
enhance our cognition and not just
nootropics but the sort of host of
things that we can do
this is one of my favorite 20-year
passions
starting in
uh my mid-20s i said my brain isn't
working the way it's supposed to i
started forgetting things i was having
problems i didn't like and my career was
just taking off
so i said what can i do to hack this
i ordered my first big
package of smart drugs and these are
mostly pharmaceuticals
they came in i was all excited and and i
took the first of the bunch i was
testing out on myself it was called
piracetam and i used an analog of that
even today and i write about that in
game changers but
the experience was really weird i took
it for a week and i'm like damn i'm so
i'm so excited i'm so disappointed this
stuff doesn't work
so i stopped taking it and the next day
i said
you know
i'm grasping for words and i realized
the previous week
every time i wanted to think of a word
it would just come to me and then i
found that i'd say what's the word for
that what was i going to say
and i realized i wasn't having that
what good nootropics do the ones that
aren't energizing which is a different
effect that's also helpful
they make you feel more like yourself
they reduce the struggle and the work it
takes to do something so it would have
been within your skill set but a
struggle or a stretch
like oh i got that sort of like if you
could you know lift a 35 pound dumbbell
but it's work and all of a sudden you'll
be like oh yeah i got that maybe i could
do 45 so it's this performance answer
but it feels so natural it feels like
yourself
that after a very short period of time
you get used to having that superpower
and it just becomes your new normal and
it turns out there's a whole bunch of
different racetam family drugs
perastem's been around for almost 60
years it's made by sandoz
pharmaceuticals a big pharmaceutical
company in europe it's protective of
your neurons it increases oxygen but not
blood flow in the brain and we're not
sure all the ways that it works but it's
got a long safety history
the downsides are it may use more
acetylcholine which is a
neurotransmitter you can eat raw egg
yolks or take soy lecithin or some of
the supplements that i make have things
that increase acetylcholine in it and
it's widely available at whole foods or
anywhere would you have to eat raw egg
yolks to get it if they're lightly
cooked it's okay but if you burn your
egg yolks you're not really going to get
functional choline it'll be burned it's
damaged by heat
so you uh you go through that that that
might be one side effect the other side
effect it amplifies caffeine so you take
one of these things hold on your brain
works better it protects your neurons in
low oxygen environments increases oxygen
in the brain
and things work better like i think i
like this
and what i switched to and in game
changes i kind of give the the dosage
and all this
is one called aniracetam and aniracetam
is
lower stress it also is the only one
that increases memory io or input output
and i'm a computer science
guy i was a
computer hacker by training when i
weighed 300 pounds and if you can
increase
the speed that you put something into a
computer's memory or you get it out it
radically changes the performance of the
whole computer so faster memory means
something well as a human being if you
can find a substance that increases your
ability to get things in and out of your
memory when you meditate you're going to
remember how to meditate better when you
study you're going to remember what you
do better when you want to recall what
you did you're going to do it better
i've been on that stuff for 20 years and
it's really impactful
there's also um
these things that if you increase energy
in the brain you increase performance
everywhere
and that's been a big a big focus my
book before game changers was called
headstrong all about
if you increase function of energy
producing cells called mitochondria in
the brain
what's it going to do and it turns out
your emotions get better your ability to
regulate your emotions your ability to
recall things your ability to just have
raw power to be you it goes up
some nootropics
and a lot of the ones that i've focused
my my formulations on are around
increasing energy throughout the body
but most especially in the brain and
then others are around manipulating or
modifying things
another nootropic that's really
really powerful
is
something that comes from green
coffee fruit not the coffee beans
themselves but actually the fruit itself
and
we produce it's called neuromaster
there's a compound in the brain called
bdnf brain derived nootropic factor
and this is nootropic factor we're
talking about neotropics this is stuff
that lets the brain be more plastic more
like a young brain and it's tied to
something called
nerve growth factor and if you can find
a way to raise those things
your brain will act like a young
person's brain it'll learn faster
so the number one thing that we know
that's free
that raises both of those is exercise
high intensity interval training lifting
heavy things stuff that you've talked
about before on the show right
but
this compound in neuromaster raises your
bdnf levels four times more than
exercise so i'm like i think i'll
exercise and i'll take that stuff so i
want that young plastic brain
and after 20 years of trying pretty much
every nootropic out there i've settled
in on what works for my brain but my
advice for you as you go down that path
and for everyone watching or listening
is
your brain is not the same as your
spouse your friend even your parents
although it's more likely to be like
your parents so the stack that works for
me
may not be the stack for you and this is
why when you see companies who have like
15 different racetams and all the stuff
in there don't start there because one
of those may have a negative effect on
you and one may have a very positive
effect so try those individually most of
the time with supplements like try all
the ones that might work and see if you
get the results you want then pull them
out
i found that with nootropics
it doesn't work that way for the
pharmaceuticals with the plant-based
ones it usually does and i make
something called smart mode
which is a
set of very well studied plant-based
compounds for cognitive enhancement
different
kind of a different universe than the
pharmaceutical side
and it's funny because another nootropic
that's controversial and it's in game
changers is micro dosing of lsd yes i
interviewed 500 plus people nobel prize
winners all these people and i said
not what does one person do i ask them
all the same structured question but
what do they all have in common like
what are the rules they follow to become
game changers so that i could boil that
down and frankly use it for myself right
like instead of doing what that one guy
did i'll do what all of them agreed on
and
not all of them microdose lsd in fact
very few of them do but the three big
buckets that came out of all this
research over several years was they do
things to be smarter
faster and happier
so happiness
doesn't come from wealth but wealth can
come from happiness but being angry and
tired and unhappy all the time is not a
good way to become successful or to
change the game in your field or frankly
to become wealthy or powerful or
whatever else important
i also got from the data not one person
who's been a game changer named when i
asked three most important things in the
world for people want to perform better
not one said wealth power or fame
they're not seeking that that is not the
target it is a side effect of them doing
what they're here to do
and
i had this dinner in new york it was
profound
my friend andrew hosted this and there's
this long table 25 people and there's
hedge fund managers like
big people in new york and it was a
jeffersonian dialogue
and what that means is that instead of
just having a random dinner conversation
one person asks a question of the table
then we discuss it
only one person at a time so we're all
listening and focused it was really cool
i've never done that before
and when it got to be my turn to ask a
question i said all right how many
people here have used
hallucinogens or psychedelics
for personal development
every single hand at the table went up
wow i'm talking 20 year old artists to
70 year old senior executive people
they'd all done it at least once right
and the rule that came out of that
in game changers was get outside your
head there's 46 laws in this book that
people follow in the lines of 48 laws of
power and robert green's actually in the
book the guy who wrote 48 laws of power
and
get outside your head doesn't mean you
go do drugs in fact if you're under 25 i
would say don't go do drugs because your
brain's not done cooking don't go you
know some to some random party even
burning man
do it with
a trained professional in a place where
it's legal and i talk about you can
actually go to a place in costa rica
that has a medically licensed ayahuasca
setting i did ayahuasca in peru 20 years
ago with a shaman in the jungle which
was a transformative experience for me
but
just to go out there and say hey i got
someone to go to disneyland that is not
good for your soul is not good for your
performance it's not cognitive enhancing
but having the ability to look in and
see what your mistakes are you can do
this with holotropic breathing which is
a type of breathing that was developed
to replace lsd for psychotherapy in the
early 70s
go into detail about that oh i love this
so tom
in addition to this losing 100 pounds
getting control of my biology and having
a successful career making my brain work
better
when all the stuff that was supposed to
work didn't work i said i'm going to go
outside the box i'm an engineer
so i'm going to try meditation it's not
supposed to work and 20 years ago no one
meditated or if you did you wouldn't
tell your friends because they think
you're a goofy
and i put it on my linkedin profile
and
i said i'm going to go
uh do a personal development thing and i
was at a point in my life i was ending a
relationship and a friend said dave you
have to go do this and i said what is it
she said i'm not going to tell you
so what she said you won't do it if i
tell you so just trust me all right fine
i didn't know what else to do i was
feeling kind of desperate so i went to
this personal development retreat and a
part of this was you'd lay down on a mat
with a facilitator started watching over
you there's a bunch of other people who
are doing the same thing and they play
like movie soundtrack music and you do
this really deep rapid breathing
and
the technical term for what you do is
called tripping balls
that's the technical term yeah you're
like what is going on here and literally
is it because you're
essentially hyperventilating yeah okay
you're hypoxic but it has with the music
and the seventh setting it has really
deep like really deep things that happen
and i have seen more
things in there than i have from
ayahuasca or from doing you know
ceremonial use of psychedelics
i do it like maybe once every year or
two and twice i've done this with stan
groff the guy who invented it he's the
guy who created the field of
transpersonal psychology
in the 60s in czechoslovakia when it was
still one country
he had from sandoz pharmaceuticals the
same company that makes paracetam he had
a shipment of lsd when it was first
invented and he as a licensed
psychiatrist treated 3000 patients with
lsd
and he noticed that they were all
getting better and he was frustrated
that the freudian stuff wasn't working
so they all get better but there's
patterns
about how you come into the world
there's patterns
where people get stuck and he could help
them work through it using this and when
when you say patterns of how you come
into the world are you talking like
literal birth we're talking about birth
okay yeah and there's according to
stan's work there's five stages of birth
and one is you're floating you're all
happy and your mom and you know there's
plenty of space and you're like ah
there's not enough space in here like
it's getting tight and then there's oh
my god someone's trying to smash the
crap out of me
that would be the actual getting born
and then there's that i just came into
the world and then there's the you know
your first breath kind of thing and then
there's the is it a safe world or is it
an unsafe world
and
he's he found that repeatedly the people
who had this kind of problem had stuff
stuck here and they would actually go
back and revisit the emotional symptoms
of birth and based on that a lot of the
pre and paranal psychology that is
groundbreaking work for the over the
last 30 years came from stan's work with
his wife and when lsd was made illegal
he said screw that noise and so he
studied yoga and ayurveda to find a kind
of breathing that would produce the same
effects and i can tell you when you do
that breathing with a licensed you know
practice professionals what they're
doing
you can do personal development that is
very hard to do and it's one of the ways
without drugs to get outside of yourself
in my case what i figured out was
i was born with the umbilical cord
wrapped around my neck
and i didn't have oxygen cut off to my
brain so
i was like
that's no big deal who cares right you
know there's like some random thing that
happened like a trivia point
and when i met the woman running this
retreat where they did breathing
it was called the star foundation i'm
still around and she has these like
really
vibrant blue eyes and she looks at me
she goes
tell me about your birth
and i was like kind of weirded out like
i'm an engineer so i i look how i go uh
hospitals vaginas uh you know and i was
kind of like like what's up with this
and
she she said well do you really really
do you know anything and i said yeah i
had the cord around like she goes i
thought so and she puts up a
powerpoint slide
and
it's me like a swot analysis they teach
that in business school like strength
weakness opportunity it was like if i
was a butterfly pinned down
like she nailed all the things i was
afraid of that i wouldn't tell anyone
and i was like
how did this how did you know that and
it was like an act of wizardry and she
said well it's science we've been
studying this for 30 years and we know
that people who have an umbilical cord
or
really traumatic coming to the world
they come in and what had happened
is i'd come into the world like
something's trying to kill me and so you
come into the world ready to kill and
you never stop and i did that for 30
years talk about raising your iq
stop doing that
you'll be a lot smarter right
explain that to people you talk about
that quite profoundly in the book what
do you mean by if you stop coming out
the world like that that you're actually
smarter well
you your body makes electrons the
primary thing that your cells do inside
each cell there's there's hundreds to
thousands or even tens of thousands of
these ancient bacteria called
mitochondria and they run a lot of our
our operating system and their job is to
take food and air and make energy and
then the energy goes somewhere energy
goes to breathing to walking to
willpower it also goes to thinking it
goes to anxiety it goes to stress it
goes to hate it goes to any of the bad
things right so
if you're putting without your
permission or knowledge you're putting
your energy into that you're not putting
into thinking you're not putting to
serving your community you're not
putting into your relationships you're
not putting in into into love into
kindness into self-kindness into
recuperation into recovery into becoming
a better human being and it is you have
one electron the same electron that
powers your iphone and
are you going to put it into being a
better human being and you put it into
being afraid of something that isn't a
threat
and we're wired to over respond to
threats because all animals including
ones without brains like ours that's the
that's the operating system for survival
and it starts inside each cell literally
quadrillions of times or quadrillions of
locations in the body millions of times
a second your body's saying what's going
to kill me now it's going to kill me now
and it's our job as we become smarter
and more intelligent more effective to
actually turn down that voice and some
of the laws and game changers are about
okay how do you become aware of that
because awareness is hard it the story
that you tell yourself about whether
something's a threat you believe it when
someone cuts you off in traffic and the
story that goes in your head is that son
of a thinks he's more important
than me and you know i should kill him
you know i used to have like an
overdeveloped middle finger muscle from
that but
that story's all bs right that probably
came from being bullied in first grade
who knows but the real story is someone
come in front of you and they could be
on their way to the hospital to go see
their dying wife or they could just be
an but you don't know so
i stopped the stress that that would
think for that i'm like i'm gonna choose
the story but we're doing this thousands
or even tens of thousands of times a day
and if you just shift the needle a
little bit
by gaining awareness
the end result is not only do you have
more time and more electrons to think
more effectively but
we're wired to be nice to each other and
when i say wired i mentioned
overreacting to fear tom
if you are a single-celled organism
there's a very specific set of rules
that everything has to follow and the
first rule is if something if you think
something's about to kill you
it's a threat immediately you have to
run
you have to kill or you have to hide and
that's the first effort it's fear
because it's game over like if you're a
bacteria someone eats you well that was
okay loss so life won't go on without
that
the second thing you do
is eat everything
because you don't know there's gonna be
a famine if you starve it's game over
and the third thing so that was feed so
we have fear feed the third one is also
an f word and it's reproduce the species
and that explains like why you date all
the people you shouldn't date right
because if you don't reproduce the
species it's game over
so
our buying is all about game over and
you can say well that sucks because
that's the human condition it's actually
the condition of life
and without it none of us would be here
because we would do things that would
self-destruct or say we do them more
often a lot of us self-destruct anyway
but there's another f word that comes at
the end of that in its friend
even single-celled organisms will work
together they'll cooperate and they'll
form a community that provides
greater benefits than being the the lone
wolf kind of thing and humans are the
same way so this is our order of
operations so our job as as human beings
your job with the work you're doing and
spreading information like this it's
like look maybe we have less fear we
have less hunger we can have better sex
and maybe more beneficial soulful
you know healthy sex by the way there's
four laws in game changes about sex
including orgasm hangovers and what
those do to men and
when you you get past that
we're actually supposed to be nice to
each other it actually feels good to be
supportive and to be nice and this is
built into our it built into every cell
in our body and that's why this getting
outside your head is so important and
whether you choose to go down that
psychedelic group whether you want to do
a shamanic drumming ceremony you want to
fast in a cave uh you want to go to
tibet and you know gotta go to mount
kailash and do meditation for 10 days
these are all paths that lead to more
self-awareness
and along the way wouldn't it be nice if
you weren't hungry the whole time so
maybe you could eat properly right
and if you just do some of these right
you don't do them all right
there's huge amounts of untapped energy
inside
the human body inside us energetically
biochemically uh emotionally spiritually
it's all it's all in there and i was
only tapping
i don't even know what percent 5 10
when i was in my 20s and i'm 46
and i have more energy now than i did
when i was 25 and i have more energy
than a lot of people work for me 20
years younger than me and
it's all there because i just stopped
doing the stuff that wasn't serving me
so to that point going back to
these 3 000 people treated with lsd the
fact that everyone around the table had
experimented with hallucinogens is it
the dissolution of the ego is it like
what is it about it that's going to
allow you to redistribute that energy to
stop wasting it on stupid like what
what happens actually oh that is a
profound question
so part of my path has been doing
neurofeedback and i've spent four months
of my life with electrodes glued to my
head doing intense meditation looking at
brain waves and i do this with clients
and
you can learn some things about the ego
i mentioned that operating system in the
body
there are studies this is creepy but it
these are real studies that are
validated and reproducible
where
they'll take a computer screen
and they'll have a random number
generator inside the computer so no one
knows what's going to come out
and if it's an even number
they show a picture of flowers and
puppies and if it's an odd number they
show a picture of grizzly violence okay
they're hooking
the subject of the study up to monitors
that look at their it's called galvanic
stress response or skin response it's a
measure of stress in the body and the
weird thing is before the image comes up
before any human being knows what the
image is going to be if it's the grisly
image
the body responds before the image it's
crazy it's creepy right if that is real
and it is then there are some things
that we don't understand there's all
sorts of theories and some of them are
being borne out and it probably has
something to do with quantum which is
the most misused new age buzzword of all
hell but it's also quantum physics
quantum biology these are real
scientific things studied at university
so we
essentially there's something going on
here where we have the ability to detect
the environment around us
before we have conscious awareness on
this so the body responds
and then we think about it and then we
tell ourselves a story about why we did
it but the order of operations is
different and if if that sounds weird
here's something that happens to most of
us sometime in our life you lean on a
hot stove
and you pull your hand away before you
get behind you say thank goodness i
pulled my hand away but that is not your
statement because you did not decide to
pull your hand away
something pulled your hand away without
your knowledge of permission and you're
glad it happened so you decided that it
was you did it right
well what is that that's the ego the ego
is the operating system that keeps you
alive if there's no human in there so it
has its own goals it has its own agenda
and it is there to keep you alive
unfortunately it thinks many things will
kill you that won't kill you and most of
its programming happens in age zero
through seven
so if you were bullied and even if you
had great parents i promise you that
there was one time when your mom stopped
nursing you and you got really pissed
off and whatever
was happening in the situation it it
leaves a pattern and your body is just a
pattern matching system and the egos
they're like hey i'm just trying to live
and your ego's also just it's absolutely
convinced that if you're in charge
instead of it you'll die because it's
job is to keep you alive and if it's not
doing its job you'll die right and
because it's an emergent system inside
the body
what's happening when you take
any of these solutions when you do any
of these practices that get you sort of
outside yourself you gain better
self-awareness because you start looking
at yourself as this system and you start
seeing what your ego is doing you see
how absurd that story is about the guy
cutting you off in traffic or so what
are some patterns and routines that
people can do on a daily basis
you've talked about how only miracles
happen in the morning talked about the
power of belief
what can anybody watching right now take
away and do on a daily basis to make
sure that they're optimized for this
okay the single biggest way to turn off
the ego the ego is about
want it's about emptiness it's about the
depends called hungry ghost so hungry
ghost hungry ghost it's one of the seven
realms of hell in tibetan buddhism and
it's one where everyone walks around
with these distended bellies and they're
always hungry no matter what they eat
they can never be satisfied no matter
what they have and this happens with a
lot of people entrepreneurs
this happened when i was 26 tom i made
six million dollars when i was 26 years
old at the company that held google's
first servers i lost it when i was 28.
when i when i had that money i looked at
a friend at the same company where we
all made more money than we should have
and i said i'll be happy when i have 10
million
i i freaking said that okay what kind of
a jerk move was that but that was my
story right that's that hungry ghost
syndrome
right and so what you can do that's the
antidote for that that's the antidote
for all the stress
anxiety
anger fear
is something i do with my kids every
night and you don't have kids to do it
but
i sit down and i say
tell me three things you're grateful for
today and gratitude is the final law in
game changers and what we see in in 40
years of zen in the neuroscience
facility when people
are grateful even for just the shittiest
day ever
they're grateful
for one little thing
that transforms the biological response
in the body from
want from that hungry ghost from i'm
never going to have i'm never going to
be happy it transforms it into
whoa
there's something good here there's some
abundance and what happens right after
gratitude and with in the neuroscience
stuff we dig deep we say okay that was
the gateway now you've got to actually
do something called forgiveness
which is when you permanently change
your pattern or instead of holding that
grudge whether it's a grudge you chose
consciously because something happened
to you when you were 20 or something you
chose unconsciously because it happened
to you when you were two it doesn't
really matter you forgive that all the
way and what's left is compassion so now
you can walk into a situation that would
have just absolutely just you know
tightened your jaw and you're like you
know what i'm grateful for this
and you're unflappable
the amount of energy you waste the
amount of struggle you have it all goes
down and it's simple write down three
things you're grateful for and i asked
my kids to do this every single night
not to write down they just tell me
and sometimes it's like i'm grateful we
had steak you know i'm grateful i played
with johnny whatever but my son was five
he goes i'm grateful for the big bang
because without it there wouldn't be
anything and you're like whoa like like
i never would have thought of that one
but these little things
it's free you just have to find a way to
consciously intentionally be grateful
instead of be hungry empty pissed off
angry stressed feeling not good enough
and all the other stuff this is what the
people who are game changers people
who've
done really big things including you
like you figured out a lot of the stuff
in this book when people get to a
certain level they by definition had to
figure out some of these laws because
you cannot get there if you're running
just the normal mogul programming that
we all come into the world with it's
gonna say you put in the book that um oh
god normal is your nemesis yeah normal
is the enemy one of the two averages the
enemy there you go nice yeah yeah i like
that so speaking of average being the
enemy and things that we can do one of
the concepts that i found really
interesting in the book is rewilding
and and your choice to move to an island
in vancouver on an organic farm because
you said the greatest gift you could
give your kids was growing up in nature
talk about that why is it important what
does it do for us what's forest bathing
like all that stuff oh this is so cool
i'm so happy that you went there
the
idea of of rewilding is that we've been
kind of domesticated
when animals are in a zoo the old zoos
were you know a bar like bars and a
cement cage and animals would die all
the time so they finally realized maybe
we could make an environment that's at
least mostly like nature so you go to
the san diego zoo and there's trees all
around and there's a little miniature
savannah and all that
well we're the same way so you have
plants in your house
you do some sometimes you're cold
sometimes you're warm sometimes you
you're hungry
things that would have happened to us as
as human beings
it's really transformative to have some
of that when you combine that with
access to nature
you get this idea of forest bathing
which came from japan and just walking
around in a forest exposing yourself to
trees and clean air
does a couple things
one is it's shown to reduce anxiety
levels just seeing plants does that but
the other thing it does is it changes
the microbiome in your gut and your your
lungs and your nose because you're
walking through forest bacteria and our
bodies collect
these bacteria from the environment
around us and they become a part of us
and the idea that we're not bacteria is
completely false there's bacteria inside
every cell in your body that power who
you are there's they become a part of us
so we like to think they're different
than those other bacteria but they're
not
so
this forest bathing you get the
cognitive effects of seeing the green
a lot of people don't know this but we
can see more shades of green than any
other color because we evolved in the
forest and the reason you need that fine
ability to see the shades of green is
because that's where the leopards hide
predators are there but we're wired in
that environment when you do it your
body relaxes
and so just introducing
plants
walks in nature
sunshine
and occasional biological stresses it's
cold it's hot i'm hungry i worked really
hard the way animals would have
transforms your biology
do you take cold showers
i do in fact if you take a cold shower
for three days in a row you only need
about 30 seconds maybe a minute at the
end of your shower so if you do this it
has to hit you on the forehead
and the chest
and it's important because the most cold
receptors are there and you're going to
last 10 seconds the first time you do it
and it's really unpleasant and you'll be
like shivering second day 20 seconds
third day like you know what i felt a
little i actually felt kind of good
today and the fourth day like yes
and
there's uh something in your
mitochondrial membrane membranes are
little layers of fat that surround every
cells
and it's called cardiolipin and a new
study just came out that shows three
days of cold exposure even for a few
minutes raises cardiolipin levels which
makes your cells make energy more
effectively all day long
the side benefit of a cold shower is
that these ancient bacteria
some of them are in good shape and some
of them are not in good shape when they
can't turn on heat quickly it means
they're weak if you show the body you
will be in an environment where
sometimes you need to make it heat
quickly the weak ones will die and
they'll be replaced by young ones so you
want to stay young
you take a cold shower you don't do it
every day but do it every couple days
after you get used to it
all right so let's talk about staying
young let's talk about so my personal
fantasy is actually to live forever what
are things that people can do on a daily
basis to prime themselves to live as
long as humanly possible i love it um
this month men's health ran an article
about i've been really public i'm going
to live to at least 180. and at least is
an important word there because like you
said i'm happy with forever
and
what you want to do is look at at aging
as death by
a thousand cuts there's no one cause of
aging
it's
we think that there's basically seven
different things that happen inside your
cells and outside your cells that evolve
over time
and
here's the deal if it's death by a
thousand cuts
maybe you could have only 500 cuts and
make them less deep so when it is not
expensive it's not inconvenient or
painful
take the path of less cuts
don't eat fried food
don't eat charred food like these are
very basic things but the science is
pretty solid on that don't eat seed oils
things like canola oil corn oil soybean
oil vegetable oil cottonseed oil that
stuff will make you age and we
understand that it is abundantly clear
don't eat too much animal protein and
don't eat no animal protein
like these are things eat a lot of
vegetables
don't eat
stuff that's been sprayed with
glyphosate because it messes with the
way your body makes collagen protein and
it messes with your gut bacteria
and
things things like that those are going
to go a huge way sleep adequately
right i sleep about six hours and five
minutes a night do you set an alarm
i do
uh if i if i have a busy day which i
quite often do however i often wake up
before the alarm and the alarm is set to
wake me up at the top of the sleep cycle
so i never wake up when i'm groggy
so you can do that or you can just make
sure you get enough sleep we have enough
deep sleep which is anti-aging enough
rem sleep which consolidates your
memories and if you do that you're going
to live a lot longer oh and don't eat
too much
if you eat a lot of calories more more
than your body needs that's aging
intermittent fasting which i i helped to
populate in 2014 with bulletproof diet
that is a big thing it works occasional
longer fasting none of these is
expensive and i take 150 supplements a
day whoa
we can't list all 150 but give me some
of the all-stars
so i focus on mitochondrial enhancement
so i take a kind of fish oil that comes
from not just krill but it comes from
fish eggs
and fish eggs are an even richer source
of phospholipids
and so that's something that bulletproof
manufactures it's our omega-3 krill
and i think that's really important
because getting omega-3s into the brain
is the most important thing you can do i
take supplements that control
inflammation because my body still tends
to because i had autoimmunity for a long
time it tends to have more
um
it has more inflammation so we make a
turmeric that has some chinese herbs in
it that really work for the kind of
inflammation that i have like i feel
much better
i take a bunch of other unusual
mitochondrial enhancers that we make
one's called unfair advantage
another one's called keto prime and that
actually primes the mitochondrial pump
to be able to use sugar or fat to make
more energy so i used to open 10 bottles
take 10 pills now i open one bottle and
it's just less work so a lot of this has
been consolidation over time in order to
do it so when i travel i have three
bags like little crack bags full of
pills and i take one when i wake up i
take one with food or coffee in the
morning one at lunch and one before i go
to bed and
you know what my life is way better when
i do it it's annoying and it's not cheap
but i'm going to extend my life and even
if i completely die trying i've extended
the quality of my life energy all along
the way you cannot lose with that
strategy
talk to me about vitamin d you've said
that sun exposure is not optional and
i'm i'm trying to imagine you in
vancouver in say february getting sun
every day
do you really go outside in the sun it
every day in vancouver it sucked to move
up to the pacific northwest i've been up
there for eight years i grew up in a
desert in new mexico
so
i'm a desert person what i do in the
winter and it took me about three
winters to figure this out
is i take vitamin d and taking vitamin d
is important as a supplement as a
supplement and we make one in fact this
is important this is the one i take it's
it's called adk because you need vitamin
a and vitamin d together and if you take
vitamin d without vitamin k and i mean
k2 not k1
when you take those together vitamin k
basically keeps the calcium in the cells
and vitamin d encourages calcium to go
into the cells if you take
the vitamin d without vitamin k it can
encourage calcification throughout the
body which is not what you want that's a
bad thing so
that
that works really well but for vitamin d
to work it has to be activated through a
process called sulfation and that's what
happens with ultraviolet light exposure
so in vancouver what i do in the morning
i stand on my vibrating platform yes
bulletproof makes that it's called the
bulletproof vibe i stand on that and i
have a suntanning lamp that's optimized
for high uvb it helps your vitamin d and
it even helps with collagen formation
where do you get the
machines i know mercola was making one
for a while that was uvb optimized yes
i have mercury machine okay and what
happened there is um it was very
unpopular to to say that
um
that uvb light had any health impacts
and it's bad for you in high doses let's
be really clear like you can get cancer
for too much uvb but if you do a search
for high uvb tanning lamps they sell
them on amazon they have little boxes
that do it and just don't overuse it
this is not about getting dark this is
about getting an effective dose of
something that's going to bio-transform
the vitamin d hormone it's a hormone not
really a vitamin in the body so that it
becomes active and that can reduce your
risk just having active vitamin d of all
sorts of things so i that's what i do
right and i feel good about that and i
think the science is solid on that what
are a few key things that people can do
for their diet if they want to live
forever
all right
i wrote two books that are sort of diet
focused
one of them is head strong but the big
diet book is the bulletproof diet and
here's the gist of it
it is cyclical ketosis if you
do the the the keto bro diet as i'm
going to call it right which is you
never eat a carb again i don't think
that's going to work for you if you eat
lots of carbs that's not going to work
for you so you should absolutely do keto
and then you should stop then you should
do keto and then you should stop and
this is for your gut bacteria and this
is for the glial cells in your brain
that prefer glucose to ketones right and
so i feel like like if you go to the oh
i'm going to be like i used to be a raw
vegan you know that's not going to end
well for you i'll just tell you really
you didn't uh enjoy the experience well
i mean i felt great for the first two
three months like most people do because
you you're eating a lot less of the
other crap but it's what happens over
time even if you're pretty knowledgeable
very few people in fact none of the
anti-aging people i know support that
kind of thing because they see it in
patients the crossfit coach is like yeah
i can spot a vegan or raw vegan i ask
them to hold on to a bar and they drop
off after five seconds and people eat
french fries can hold on for 15 seconds
if people eat grass-fed steak and you do
keto and you know are doing things right
they hold on for 30 seconds like it's
quantifiable right so this isn't a rip
on vegans i was a vegan for a long time
i would eat gravel if it's what was best
for me or best for the planet i'd say
eating grass-fed meat that restores
soils
is best for you and best for the planet
but not too much and that plus a huge
plate of vegetables with lots of
undamaged quality fats following the
ratio in your cells
your cells are 45 saturated fat your
cell membranes especially in the brain
is a little bit higher
they're in the brain about 30 35 percent
monounsaturated fat
and then the rest of it is all about the
ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 and there
you want more omega-3 and less omega-6
so tons of veggies moderate amount of
high-quality grass-fed protein tons of
fat from protein perspective
you want to get high quality protein and
plant compounds polyphenols terribly
important you're not going to get them
from colored fruits and vegetables
they're just not rich enough
herbs and spices are how you get it and
number one source of polyphenols in the
world you probably know what it is
um
coffee coffee i do know that because you
talked about it in the book i was like
right so coffee tea chocolate and i'm
sad to say this even though we all like
red wine it doesn't have very many
polyphenols and you gotta detox the
alcohol and the aldehyde so you can have
some wine but make sure it's good
quality wine i would say wine and in
grass-fed meat it's like spend money on
quality and consume less
and you don't have to consume none and
in that algorithm it's like it's quality
over quantity when you do that it sends
a signal to the whole food production
system
about what's acceptable and you know
this because you've run a very impactful
sizeable company right
if the customers are saying they want
something and they won't buy the wrong
stuff well then the company's making the
garbage food they lose sales and the
company's making the really good things
right they gain sales so all of us when
we say i want the animal that was fed
grass instead of fed corn and soy and
antibiotics i'm willing to pay a little
bit more even if i buy a little bit less
so it's the same dollars out of my
pocket you'll change our soil you'll
change our agricultural systems i
i firmly believe that both for my own
biology and for the world that we're
going to live forever in i don't want to
mess it up right
and i don't know
you know a lot about this stuff tom what
do you think about nutrition dude we
will bring you back for part two because
i haven't even gotten to a like
one-fifth of the things that i wanted to
talk to you i've been talking too much
no this has been amazing it's exactly
what i wanted before i asked my last
question tell these guys where they can
find you online
go to
bulletproof.com and check out
bulletproof radio on itunes wherever
podcasts are distributed and game
changers is in stores now if you read it
and you like it leave a review i
actually see those reviews and you do
too when people tell you any of your
work it matters we care like the reviews
you get on the show they matter you can
thank both of us
and there you got your gratitude
checkbox for the day
nice i like that
my final question what's one change that
people could make that would have the
biggest impact on their health
wow just one change with the single
biggest impact all right can i answer
with two things sure all right number
one learn how to sleep like a boss okay
there's a bunch of new sleep hacks and
game changers do whatever it takes to
sleep really well and you're gonna have
to black out your room you're gonna have
to like just learn how to do it no one
teaches us how to sleep okay and most of
that stuff is free or very inexpensive
or one time cost
the second thing is
you've got to stop eating the things
that make you weak and you know what
those are and there's one category of
foods that are pretty much bad for
everyone
seed oils deep fried stuff
charred things and whole grains those
are just not good for anyone
right and you may tolerate whole grains
better than your friend they're still
not good for you sorry okay so get those
out and in the bulletproof diet there's
a layer of suspect foods
they're
bad for some people and good for some
people and you need to know which of the
suspect foods are guilty for you
and there's an infographic just google
bulletproof roadmap and you can download
it it's a free thing it's basically the
entire bulletproof diet book without all
the explanations just here's what to do
now here's what foods are really good
the bulletproof foods these are suspect
and these are kryptonite foods just so
you can alright i'm going to do a
protein or whatever that that totally
works
all right i love it
guys
man when i say that we didn't even begin
to get into some of the stuff that this
guy can go
wax eloquently about you're going to
want to dive into this world and check
it out he is one of the most
recognizable names in the world of
longevity hacking uh biohacking in
general mitochondria like all kinds of
stuff that are going to help you live
your best life he's that guy for a
reason so he has just a breadth of
knowledge on a whole bunch of subjects
his new book game changers i found
really interesting we didn't even get to
go into sex he mentioned the
orgasm hangovers which is just the tip
of the iceberg there's a whole bunch of
really interesting stuff he actually
graphed out his own
orgasm to life satisfaction it was
amazing it is one of a hundred reasons
you're gonna want to check out that book
all right if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
vote much for watching and being a part
of this community if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential
you